---
title:  "What is molecular docking?"
date: 2019-02-00
permalink: /posts/2019/01/docking/
categories: 
  - long
tags:
  - computational biology
---

I will attempt to explain what is molecular docking, starting from layman's level, and building up to [].

Let us start from a fundamental tenet of structural biology, that _structure leads to function_. This may sound obvious (or not), but the implications are profound. 

I once went to a conference where about half of the participants are structural biologists, and the other half are not. During one of the informal after-dinner discussions, one of the invited speakers provocatively said something to the effect of "I don't believe that structure leads to function". Silence ensued. Sacrilege! -- is what probably the structural biologists collectively thought then. I don't know whether the speaker really thought that or he just threw a clickbaity statement to make a more nuanced point, but I'll leave the dinner party flashback here.

We know that physics, chemistry, and biology are divided that way based on the "chunking" level that each deals with. Roughly, physics is at particle level; chemistry, molecule; biology, cell and above. Medicine, for example, can be seen to be biology at the human organism level. Stating that _structure leads to function_ then is to take a multi-level view: the biological function observation arises from chemical molecular structures, which obey physical laws. It is no wonder that many structural biologists also call themselves biophysicist (note the transcending of levels there). 
