---
title:  "Book notes: _Gödel, Escher, Bach_"
date: 2019-01-00
permalink: /posts/2019/01/geb-notes/
categories: 
  - book notes
tags:
  - popular science
---
I have finished reading Douglas Hofstadter's _Gödel, Escher, Bach_, though I still don't know how to answer the question "What is it about?" in one sentence. I guess I can say it's mostly about Gödel's incompleteness theorem, but then I dread the rejoinder "Really? All 700+ pages of it?".

Maybe instead of trying to tell, I would show you my notes instead. Take a gander. 
 
#### Preface to _GEB_'s Twentieth-anniversary Edition
> ...<i>GEB</i> is a very personal attempt to say how it is that animate beings can come out of inanimate matter.

> What is an "I", and why are such things found (at least so far) only in association with, as poet Russell Edson once wonderfully phrased it, "teetering bulbs of dread and dream"... 

> ..."strange loop" notion holds the key to unraveling the mystery that we conscious beings call "being" or "consciousness".

> ...the Gödelian strange loop that arises in formal systems in mathematics (_i.e._, collections of rules churning out an endless series of mathematical truths solely by mechanical symbol-shunting without any regard to meanings or ideas hidden in the shapes being manipulated) is a loop that allows such a system to "perceive itself", to talk about itself, to become "self-aware", and in a sense it would not be going too far to say that by virtue of having such a loop, aformal system _acquires a self_.

> Meaning comes in despite one's best effort to keep symbols meaningless!

#### Introduction: A Musico-Logical Offering
> In its absolutely barest form, Godel's discovery involves the translation of an ancient paradox in philosophy into mathematical terms. That paradox is the so-called Epimenides paradox, or liar paradox. Epimenides was a Cretan who made one immortal statement: "All Cretans are liars." A sharper version of the statement is simply "I am lying"; or, "This statement is false". It is that last version which I will usually mean when I speak of the Epimenides paradox. It is a statement which rudely violates the usually assumed dichotomy of statements into true and false, because if you tentatively think it is true, then it immediately backfires on you and makes you think it is false.

The actual wording of the theorem is apparently not for mortal eyes, that's why we need 700+ pages, okay?
<blockquote>Godel's   Theorem   appears   as   Proposition   VI   in   his   1931   paper   "On   Formally Undecidable Propositions in Principia Mathematica and Related Systems I." It states:  
<blockquote>To  every  ω-consistent  recursive  class  K  of  formulae  there  correspond  recursive  class-signs r, such that neither v Gen r nor  Neg (v Gen r) belongs to Fig (K) (where v is the free variable of r).</blockquote>  
Actually,  it  was  in  German,  and  perhaps  you  feel  that it might as well be in German anyway. So here is a paraphrase in more normal English:   
<blockquote>All consistent axiomatic formulations of number theory include undecidable propositions.</blockquote> 
</blockquote>

Grelling's paradox: 
> Divide the adjectives in English into two categories: those which are self-descriptive, such as "pentasyllabic", "awkwardnessful", and "recherche", and those which are not, such as "edible", "incomplete", and "bisyllabic". Now if we admit "non-selfdescriptive" as an adjective, to which class does it belong? If it seems questionable to include hyphenated words, we can use two terms invented specially for this paradox: autological (= "self- descriptive"), and heterological (= "non-self-descriptive"). The question then becomes: "Is "Is 'heterological' heterological?"

Grelling's paradox is particularly interesting to me. I come up with a couple more examples. The adjective "meaningless" is not meaningless. For it has a meaning: that it lacks meaning. The adjective "beyond words" is not beyond words. Because, ... need I say more?

In this section Hofstadter is talking about the notion of _metalanguage_, that we can transcend out of language and talk about it. "Meaningless" of course is meaningless within the system. Only by transcending out to the meta plane we observe that "meaningless" has a meaning.

#### Chapter 1: The MU-Puzzle
#### Two-Part Invention
#### Chapter II: Meaning and Form in Mathematics 
Euclid's proof for the infinitude of prime numbers:
> This proof works by showing that whatever number you pick, there is a prime larger than it. Pick a number-N. Multiply all the positive integers starting with 1 and ending with N; in other words, form the factorial of N, written "N!". What you get is divisible by every number up to N. When you add 1 to N!, the result <br>
can't be a multiple of 2 (because it leaves 1 over, when you divide by 2);<br>
can't be a multiple of 3 (because it leaves 1 over, when you divide by 3);<br>
can't be a multiple of 4 (because it leaves 1 over, when you divide by 4);<br>
. . .<br>
can't be a multiple of N (because it leaves 1 over, when you divide by N);<br>
In other words, N! + 1, if it is divisible at all (other than by 1 and itself only i
divisible by numbers greater than N. So either it is itself prime, or prime divisors are greater than N. But in either case we've shown the must exist a prime above N. The process holds no matter what number is. Whatever N is, there is a prime greater than N. 

#### Sonata for Unaccompanied Achilles
#### Chapter III: Figure and Ground 
#### Contracrostipunctus
The record player metaphor in this dialogue is a direct analogy for Gödel's theorem: Record player X cannot play a song called "I Cannot Be Played on Record Player X". Hofstadter explains the isomorphism of this analogy to Gödel's theorem in the following chapter.

#### Chapter IV: Consistency, Completeness, and Geometry 
#### Little Harmonic Labyrinth
The meta-genie appearance here is hilarious and clever. A snippet:
> Achilles: Oh, thank you so very much, Genie. But curiosity is provoked. Before I make my wish, would you mind telling me who-or what- GOD is?<br>
Genie: Not at all. "GOD" is an acronym which stands "GOD Over Djinn". The word "Djinn" is used designate Genies, Meta-Genies, Meta-Meta-Genies etc. It is a Typeless word. <br>
Achilles: But-but-how can "GOD" be a word in own acronym? That doesn't make any sense!<br>
Genie: Oh, aren't you acquainted with recursive acronyms? I thought everybody knew about them. You see, "GOD" stands for "GOD Over Djinn"-which can be expanded as "GOD Over Djinn, O, Djinn"-and that can, in turn, be expanded to "G( Over Djinn, Over Djinn, Over Djinn"-which can its turn, be further expanded ... You can go as as you like.

#### Chapter V: Recursive Structures and Processes 
#### Canon by Intervallic Augmentation
#### Chapter VI: The Location of Meaning 
#### Chromatic Fantasy, And Feud
#### Chapter VII: The Propositional Calculus 
#### Crab Canon
#### Chapter VIII: Typographical Number Theory 
#### A Mu Offering
#### Chapter IX: Mumon and Gödel
#### Prelude ...

#### Chapter X: Levels of Description, and Computer Systems 
>The idea that "you" know all about "yourself" is so familiar from interaction with people that it was natural to extend it to the computer-after all, it was intelligent enough that it could "talk" to them in English! Their question was not unlike asking a person, "Why are you making so few red blood cells today?" People do not know about that level -- the "operating system level" -- of their bodies.

>Consider, for example, the system whose 'hardware" is the earth's atmosphere (not very hard, but no matter), and whose "software" is the weather. Keeping track of the motions of all of the molecules simultaneously would be a very low-level way of "understanding" the weather, rather like looking at a huge, complicated program on the machine language level. Obviously it is way beyond human comprehension. But we still have our own peculiarly human ways of looking at, and describing, weather phenomena. Our chunked view of the weather is based on very high-level phenomena, such as: rain, fog, snow, hurricanes, cold fronts, seasons, pressures, trade winds, the jet stream, cumulonimbus clouds, thunderstorms, inversion layers, and so on. All of these phenomena involve astronomical numbers of molecules, somehow behaving in concert so that large-scale trends emerge. This is a little like looking at the weather and a compiler language.

>Similarly, and fortunately, one does not have to know all about quarks to understand many things about the particles which they may compose. Thus, a nuclear physicist can proceed with theories of nuclei that are based on protons and neutrons, and ignore quark theories and their rivals. The nuclear physicist has a chunked picture of protons and neutrons -- a description derived from lower-level theories buf which does not require understanding the lower-level theories. Likewise, an atomic physicist has a chunked picture of an atomic nucleus derived from nuclear theory. Then a chemist has a chunked picture of the electrons and their orbits, and builds theories of small molecules, theories which can be taken over in a chunked way by the molecular biologist, who has an intuition for how small molecules hang together, but whose technical expertise is in the field of extremely large molecules and how they interact. Then the cell biologist has a chunked picture of the units which the molecular biologist pores over, and tries to use them to account for the ways that cells interact. The point is clear. Each level is, in some sense, "sealed off" from the levels below it. This is another of Simon's vivid terms, recalling the way in which a submarine is built in compartments, so that if one part is damaged, and water begins pouring in, the trouble can be prevented from spreading, by closing the doors, thereby sealing off the damaged compartment from neighboring compartments. <br><br>
Although there is always some "leakage" between the hierarchical levels of science, so that a chemist cannot afford to ignore lower-level physics totally, or a biologist to ignore chemistry totally, there is almost no leakage from one level to a distant level. That is why people can have intuitive understandings of other people without necessarily understanding the quark model, the structure of nuclei, the nature of electron orbits, the chemical bond, the structure of proteins, the organelles in a cell, the methods of intercellular communication, the physiology of the various organs of the human body, or the complex interactions among organs. All that a person needs is a chunked model of how the highest level acts; and as all know, such models are very realistic and successful.

>Similarly, you might ask about a sprinter, "Where is the '9.3' stored, that makes him be able to run 100 yards in 9.3 seconds?" Obviously, it is not stored anywhere. His time is a result of how he is built, what his reaction time is, a million factors all interacting when he runs. The time is quite 'reproducible, but it is not stored in his body anywhere. It is spread around among all the cells of his body and only manifests itself in the act of the sprint itself.

#### Ant Fugue
>Anteater: Exactly. There is no natural mapping from the individual letters into the real world. The natural mapping occurs on a higher level between words, and parts of the real world. If you wanted to describe the book, therefore, you would make no mention of the letter level. <br>
Achilles: Of course not! I'd describe the plot and the characters, and so forth. <br>
Anteater: So there you are. You would omit all mention of the building blocks, even though the book exists thanks to them. They are the medium, but not the message.

#### Chapter XI: Brains and Thoughts 
>One possible explanation could be that memories are coded locally, but over and over again in different areas of the cortex -- a strategy perhaps developed in evolution as security against possible loss of cortex in fights, or in experiments conducted by neurophysiologists. Another explanation would be that memories can be reconstructed from dynamic processes spread over the whole brain, but can be triggered from local spots. This theory is based on the notion of modern telephone networks, where the routing of a long-distance call is not predictable in advance, for it is selected at the time the call is placed, and depends on the situation all over the whole country. Destroying any local part of the network would not block calls; it would just cause them to be routed around the damaged area. In this sense any call is potentially nonlocalizable. Yet any call just connects up two specific points; in this sense any call is localizable.

>The crystallization metaphor yields a pretty image derived from statistical mechanics, of a myriad microscopic and uncorrelated activities in a medium, slowly producing local regions of coherence which spread and enlarge; in the end, the myriad small events will have performed a complete structural revamping of their medium from the bottom up, changing it from a chaotic assembly of independent elements into one large, coherent, fully linked structure. If one thinks of the early neural activities as independent, and of the end result of their many independent firings as the triggering of a well-defined large "module" of neurons, then the word "crystallization" seems quite apt.

>In between the declarative and procedural extremes, there are all possible shades. Consider the recall of a melody. Is the melody stored in your brain, note by note? Could a surgeon extract a winding neural filament from your brain, then stretch it straight, and finally proceed to pinpoint along it the successively stored notes, almost as if it were a piece of magnetic tape? If so, then melodies are stored declaratively. Or is the recall of a melody mediated by the interaction of a large number of symbols, some of which represent tonal relationships, others of which represent emotional qualities, others of which represent rhythmic devices, and so on? If so, then melodies are stored procedurally. In reality, there is probably a mixture of these extremes in the way a melody is stored and recalled.

#### English French German Suit
#### Chapter XII: Minds and Thoughts 
>Imagine that you are given a strange atlas of the USA, with all natural geological features premarked-such as rivers, mountains, lakes, and so on-but with nary a printed word. Rivers are shown as blue lines, mountains blue color, and so on. Now you are told to convert it into a road atlas for a trip which you will soon make. You must neatly fill in the names of all states, their boundaries, time zones, then all counties, cities, towns, all freeways and highways and toll routes, all county roads, all state and national parks, campgrounds, scenic areas, dams, airports, and so on ... All of this must be carried out down to the level that would appear in a detailed road atlas. And it must be manufactured out of your own head. You are not allowed access to any information which would help you for the duration of your task. ... The end product will be your personal map of the "Alternative Structure of the Union"-your own personal "ASU".

>Now that we have carried our geographical analogy quite far, we return to the
question of isomorphisms between brains. You might well wonder why this whole question of brain isomorphisms has been stressed so much. What does it matter if two brains are isomorphic, or quasi-isomorphic, or not isomorphic at all? The answer is that we have an intuitive sense that, although other people differ from us in important ways, they are still "the same" as we are in some deep and important ways. It would be instructive to be able to pinpoint what this invariant core of human intelligence is, and then to be able to describe the kinds of "embellishments" which can be added to it, making each one of us a unique embodiment of this abstract and mysterious quality called "intelligence".

>Although we should recognize the depth to which culture affects thought, we should not overstress the role of language in molding thoughts. For instance, what we might call two "chairs" might be perceived by a speaker of French as objects belonging to two distinct types: "chaise" and "fauteuil" ("chair" and "armchair"). People whose native language is French are more aware of that difference than we are-but then people who grow up in a rural area are more aware of, say, the difference between a pickup and a truck, than a city dweller is. A city dweller may call them both "trucks". It is not the difference in native language, but the difference in culture (or subculture), that gives rise to this perceptual difference.

#### Aria with Diverse Variations
#### Chapter XIII: BlooP and FlooP and GlooP 
>...what Cantor wanted to show was that if a "directory" of real numbers were made, it would inevitably leave some real numbers out-so that actually, the notion of a complete directory of real numbers is a contradiction in terms.

>The essence of Cantor's result is that there are (at least) two distinct types of infinity: one kind of infinity describes how many entries there can be in an infinite directory or table, and another describes how many real numbers there are (i.e., how many points there are on a line, or line segment)-and this latter is "bigger", in the sense that the real numbers cannot be squeezed into a table whose length is described by the former kind of infinity.

It is unwieldy to quote Cantor's diagonal method, so I'll attempt so summarise for my own reference: Suppose we have a list of all real numbers from 0 to 1.   
0.12345...  
0.14567...  
0.23245...  
Consider a number made of of the digits from the diagonal, but minus 1:  
0.142...  
This number cannot occur in the list because the first digit is different from the first number, the second digit is different from the second number, blah blah blah. If we add this number to the list, then we can construct a new number from the new diagonal. Thus the infiniteness of the list somehow clobbers itself.

>The repeatability of Cantor's diagonal method is similar to the repeatability of the
Tortoise's diabolic method for breaking the Crab's phonographs, one by one, as they got more and more "hi-fi" and-at least so the Crab hoped-more "Perfect". This method involves constructing, for each phonograph, a particular song which that phonograph cannot reproduce. It is not a coincidence that Cantor's trick and the Tortoise's trick share this curious repeatability; indeed, the Contracrostipunctus might well have been named "Cantorcrostipunctus" instead. Moreover, as the Tortoise subtly hinted to the innocent Achilles, the events in the Contracrostipunctus are a paraphrase of the construction which Gödel used in proving his Incompleteness Theorem; it follows that the Gödel construction is also very much like a diagonal construction. 

#### Air on G's String
>"Is not the title of any book, so far as I know" is not the title of any book, so far as I know

>"Is a sentence fragment" is a sentence fragment

>"Yields falsehood when preceded by its quotation" yields falsehood when preceded by its quotation



---

Come to think about it, how I came to read this book is quite fortuitous: I was watching a Python Conference talk <[K. Lars Lohn, PyCon 2016 (Youtube)](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bSfe5M_zG2s&feature=youtu.be)> and the speaker mentioned this book and I was intrigued. (This is not totally random. Because of its subject matter, this book is a popular reading for computer scientists.)

Again, "So, what is it about?", here is my best attempt: It's about Gödel's incompleteness theorem, explained in relation to parallels found in Escher's works and Bach's fugues, with implications and meanderings from from formal systems in mathematics, the nature of consciousness, to artificial intelligence.

"Can you explain to me what is Gödel's incompleteness theorem?" ... just read the book will you?
